very easy and very important topic for ACE exam

https://cloud.google.com/sdk/docs/components

Cloud SDK comes with a set of components some of which are installed by default and some you can install as per need.
	see @components.png
	default components	
		gcloud - for interacting with google cloud via commands
		gsutil - for interacting with bigquery with commands
		gsutil - for interacting with cloud storage with commands
		Cloud SDK Core Libraries - Libraries used internally by the gcloud CLI tools.
		
	Note that alpha, beta components are not installed by default.
	e.g. cbt, pubsub-emulator, minikube, kubectl etc	
		gcloud components install/remove component_name
		
	
Setting up SDK
	gcloud init
		Authorizes Cloud SDK tools to use your user account credentials to access Google Cloud
		Sets up a Cloud SDK configuration and sets a base set of properties
		
	If you want to change the account used in current gcloud configuration, you can run 
		gcloud auth login
			if you have couple of google accounts(office and personal) and want to use same sdk installation then its quite a good hack.
		Here you will be redirected to web login page where you put username/password.	
		
	But if you want to login with service account,
		gcloud auth activate-service-account [ACCOUNT] --key-file=[KEY_FILE]
		service accounts dont have username/password


Configurations
	A configuration is a named set of SDK properties. A configuration works like a profile.
	see @configurations.png
	The gcloud CLI uses a configuration named "default" as the initial active configuration; default is suitable for most use cases. However, you can also create additional configurations and switch between them as required.
	commands
		gcloud config configurations list
		gcloud config configurations activate atp-dev
	

Misc Important
	Cloud shell has cloud sdk pre-installed with bunch of other stuff.

	You can either download the SDK and install OR you can use docker image of cloud SDK.
	
gcloud commands
	gcloud components list
	gcloud components install kubectl  (not installed by default)
	
	gcloud config set account dnyanesh4dd@gmail.com
	gcloud auth revoke accountname     -> removes from local
	gcloud config configurations create dev
	gcloud config configurations activate dev
	gcloud config unset project
	gcloud config list
	
	gcloud auth configure-docker
	gcloud auth application-credentials  - play around default application credentials

	
