
https://cloud.google.com/hybrid-connectivity

If you have a existig on prem network then What are different ways to connect your network to gcp network?
	Cloud VPN
		private connection between on prem and gcp network
		slow
	Cloud Interconnect
		see @cloud interconnect.png
		Dedicated Interconnect
			private connection between on prem and gcp network
			fastest - more than 10gbps
		Partner Interconnect
			private connection between on prem and gcp network
			faster - 50mbps - 10gbps	
	Peering
		only if you need Google Workspace and supported Google APIs.
		done over external ip addresses and internet
		Direct Peering			
		Carrier Peering
	
	
ACE***
Interconnects are different from peering in that they give you connectivity using "private address space" into your Google VPC.
While Peering relies on "external IP addresses".
Cloud interconnect is recommended way.



Cloud Interconnect
	Cloud Interconnect provides access to all Google Cloud products and services from your on-premises network "except Google Workspace".
	Cloud interconnect is recommended way(unless you want to connect google workspace).
	

	Dedicated Interconnect
		A direct physical connection between your on prem network and gcp network.
		This requires a common physical colocation facility to setup the connection. 
		This common facility is within gcp geographical boundries.
		see@dedicated-inteconnect.png
		The number of dedicated colocation facilities are limited which makes it bit inconvinient to use hence gcp has partner interconnect.
		No risk of security since networks are connected using internal IP addresses and traffic never routed via internet.
		
		---> min capacity 10gbps
		Dedicated Interconnect enables you to transfer large amounts of data between networks, which can be more cost-effective and fast than purchasing additional bandwidth over the public internet.
		
		
	Partner Interconnect
		Helps to establish a high speed connection between on prem and gcp via a third party service provider(who have tied up with gcp).
		Service providers have existing physical connections to Google's network that they make available for their customers to use.
		Used when dedicated colocation facility is not near.
		see@partner interconnect.png
		No risk of security since networks are connected using internal IP addresses and traffic never routed via internet(partner netowrk is still has GCP SLAs and SLOs).
		has leser speed than dedicated interconnect. 
		----> max capacity 10gbps
	
Peering	
	Peering is used ONLY IF you need Google Workspace and supported Google APIs only.
	
	Direct Peering
		You can connect your on prem network to gcp netowrk directly via direct peering if you are near to google's any PoP(Point of Presence - PoP is a location on world map where google's netowrk connects rest of the internet)
		If no, then use carrier peering.
		Via peering you can access any of google's services directly but via interconnect we cant.	
		"Direct and carrier peering is done via external Ip address."
		***Note that peering(Carrier and Direct) is used only if you need Google Workspace and supported Google APIs only. Otherwise Cloud interconnect is recommended way.
		
	Carrier Peering
		If you want access to all gcp services and you are not close to any PoP then you need carrier peering.
		***Note that peering(Carrier and Direct) is used only if you need Google Workspace and supported Google APIs only. Otherwise Cloud interconnect is recommended way.
	
	
How to choose when to use which of the above service?
	https://cloud.google.com/network-connectivity/docs/how-to/choose-product
	https://cloud.google.com/hybrid-connectivity
	
	
Which services can I use to connect to google cloud?
	https://cloud.google.com/network-connectivity/docs/how-to/choose-product#google-cloud
	Cloud VPn: slow
	Cloud Internconnect : fast, high throughput
	Cloud Router : creates a BGP session
	
	***Note that peering(Carrier and Direct) is used only if you need Google Workspace and supported Google APIs only. Otherwise Cloud interconnect is recommended way.



Peering Has no setup or maintenance costs but interconnect has.
If you want to connect google cloud use
	Interconnect
	VPN
	Clou Router
But
If you want to connect to other google services like workspace,youtube then use direct/carrier peering.

	
Links :
	All in one playlist for networking : https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLIivdWyY5sqJ0oXcnZYqOnuNRsLF9H48u 
	Best Practices  https://cloud.google.com/architecture/best-practices-vpc-design


gcloud

Best Practices

Pricing