GCP netowrk Tiers
	VIMP - https://cloud.google.com/network-tiers/#tab1
	

VPC:
	A Virtual Private Cloud (VPC) network is a virtual version of a physical network
	VPC is global whole subnet is regional.
	VPC networks only support IPv4 unicast traffic. They do not support broadcast, multicast, or IPv6 traffic within the network. However extrnal IPV6 traffic can be handled by using load balancers.
	Automode network
		In default network, google adds one subnet per region. 
		ACE** -- subnet in Auto mode vpc can be expanded from /20 to max /16
		As new Google Cloud regions become available, new subnets in those regions are automatically added to auto mode nw.
		You can convert automode nw to custom mode, but remember this is one way transaction, other way isnt possible		
		Its not recommended to use it in most cases, hence you can disable it or add org policy constraint (compute.skipDefaultNetworkCreation) not to create it.
		In this nw, resources communincate with each other using internal IPs are it automatically adds fw rule 'fw-default-allow-internal'

	Custom netowrk
		It starts with no subnet hence more control to you. You can add subnets in only region you want.
		In this nw, resources cannot communincate with each other using internal IPs as default fw rule is to deny ingress traffic. You need to add fw rule to allow this.

Subnet : 	
	Subnet is fancy way of saying "range of isolated ip addresses"
	
	You can create many subnets in region if required unless quota exceeds.

	We can expand the range of subnet unless its not collapsing with CIDR ranges of other subnets in the same network.
	But we cannot shrink the subnet.
	AVOID LARGE SUBNETS.
	
	imp - Every subnet has 4 reserved IP addresses in its range so choose subnet range wisely.
				one ip for network address
				one ip for default gateway
				one ip for potential future use
				one ip for broadcast
	Important Considerations:			
		You can have primary and secondary ranges in subnet and they may not be contiguous.
		The minimum primary or secondary range size is eight IP addresses. In other words, the longest subnet mask you can use is /29
		Primary and secondary ranges for subnets cannot overlap with any allocated range, any primary or secondary range of another subnet in the same network, or any IP ranges of subnets in peered networks.

Subnet Address Ranges
	Primary Ip ranges
		Mandatory IP range used for defining subnet.
	Secondary Ip ranges
		Optional
	Alis Ip ranges?
		Alis ip ranges can be allocated from primary or secondary ranges.
		GKE clusters that use alias ip ranges are called VPC-native clusters.

	--> Each primary or secondary IP range for all subnets in a VPC network must be a unique valid CIDR block.
		

Load Balancer:
	Which type of load balancer do I need?
	decision tree -- https://cloud.google.com/load-balancing/images/choose-lb.svg
	Globla HTTPS load balancer :
		Asked in exam heavily
		https://cloud.google.com/load-balancing/docs/https/

Session Affinity
	IF this header is present in request then load balancer will direct request to the same backend service rather than finding new backend to serve this request.


VPC :
	Global private cloud env that can "span across multiple regions".
	Traditional VPCs are regional and to be able to talk across regions you have to talk via public internet which is risky as well as time consuming.
	Hence VPC.
	
	Without a VPC network, you cannot create VM instances, containers, or App Engine applications. Therefore, each Google Cloud project has a default network to get you started. Default network has default 1 subnet per region , default routes, and default firewall rules.
	
	Note : VPC can span accross multiple zones in a single region.
		   see https://cloud.google.com/vpc/docs/vpc#network_example
	
	Each subnet has primary range and secondary range. Both cannot intersect.
			When you have multiple services running on same machine, and you want to give each service different IP then you can use Alias Ip addresess that can come from primary or secondary ip ranges.
			Each primary or secondary IP range for all subnets in a VPC network must be a unique valid CIDR block.
	Yuo can expand a subnet but cannot contract it.
	Longest subnet mask you can use is /29(max 8 ip addresses) - 4 usable ips
	
	You cannot access resource across VPCs using internal IP addresses even though they are in same project.
	You can switch a VPC network from auto mode to custom mode. This is a one-way conversion

	
Cloud interconnect
	Dedicated Interconnect
		10gbps
	Partner Interconnect
		less than 10gbps speed
	
NAT : 
	  VM instances without external IP addresses are isolated from external networks/internet. Using Cloud NAT, these instances can access the internet	
	  explained like a pro https://youtu.be/FTUV0t6JaDA
	  Network address translation.
	  Convert set of private ip addresses into set of public ip addresses and vice versa.
	  Not not needed once ipv6 is in full force.
	  
Private Google Access	  
	  VM instances that have no external IP addresses can use Private Google Access to reach external IP addresses of Google APIs and services. 
	  By default, Private Google Access is disabled on a VPC network.
	  https://cloud.google.com/vpc/docs/private-access-options#pga-supported
	  https://cloud.google.com/nat/docs/monitoring
	  If vm dont have external IP, it can talk to only resources within VPC. It cant talk to global resources like cloud run, storage bucket etc, also not to internet.
	  With Private Google Access enabled on subnet, it can now access google services like storage bucket.
	  This is where NAT comes into picture to access public internet.
	
	
Shared VPC
	A Shared VPC network is a VPC network defined in a host project and made available to its service projects.
	Single Host project
	Many Service Projects(Child)
	 
	Useful when you want to communicate to resources across multiple projects.	
	  
	Shared VPC is only available for projects "within an organisation".
	Advantage is you get central point of administration (host project)for all the VPCs(Service Project), job becomes easy.
	
	VPC peering is completely different as it allows communicattion between two or more diffrent vpc networks which may not be in same project or same organization.
	You can share with the service projects
		all host project subnets 
		selected host project subnets only.
	see diagram @https://cloud.google.com/vpc/docs/shared-vpc#shared_vpc_overview
	
	There can be many host projects but service project can be attached to max one host project. offcourse!	


VPC Peering
	https://cloud.google.com/vpc/docs/vpc-peering
	VPC networks can be connected to other VPC networks in different projects or "even organizations" by using VPC Network Peering.
	Traffic stays within Google's network and doesn't traverse the public internet, hence resources communicate via private internal IP in vpc peering.
	It does not matter wheather networks are in same org or different
	Finally you can have org policy constraint to control which vpc netoworks can peer with which.
	
	-->VPC peering works only with COmpute Engine, GKE, and App engine flex env.
	
	Conditions for peering:
		- No overlapping range. Google Cloud checks to see if there are any subnets with overlapping IP ranges between the two VPC networks, if it finds then peering will fail. N1, N2, N3 are peered networks with N4. If N5 wants to peer with N4 then subnet ranges from N1, N2, N3, N4, N5 has to be mutually exclusive.
		- Both VPCs has to set up peering. its not one sided activity.
		- Networks participating in VPC has to be a VPC networks, legacy or on prem networks cant be used in peering.
		- Only directly peered networks can communicate. Transitive peering is not supported. In other words, if VPC network N1 is peered with N2 and N3, but N2 and N3 are not directly connected, VPC network N2 cannot communicate with VPC network N3 over VPC Network Peering.
		- When you connect networks using VPC Network Peering, firewall rules are not exchanged between them. So firewall rules of one VPC are not applied to the other one. Makes sense.
		
	
Be it a shared VPC or VPC peering, you get to communicate using internal ip addresses.
	Since service can communnicate via internal Ip addresses,
			low network latency
			no risk of exposing service to external world hence tight security
			no egress charges as data doesnt leave gcp network. Remember google charges you even if services communicate within a same zone via external ip(cause data leaves gcp network and flow over internet) 

When to choose shared vpc over vpc peering?
	see shared vpc vs vpc peering.png


	
CIDR :
	Classless Inter Domain Routing
	10.10.0.254/24 -> 00001001 10010100 000001001 11111111  
			This means first 24 bits are locked and next 8 bits can be changed.
			This effectively means we can have max 256 (2^8) ip addresses in this subnet
				10.10.0.1
				10.10.0.2
				10.10.0.3
				.
				.
				.
				10.10.0.255
			and subnet address is 10.10.0.255
	 

Custom network cannot be converted into auto mode network.
Automatic network has one subnet per region(which we dont need mostly). For newly added regions, subnets are added automatically by gcp.

IP address:
	Every resource has an internal IP address 
	If it is internet facing resource then it has internal+external IPs.
	Extrenal Ip can be static(reserved) IP or ephemeral IP(default is ephemeral)
	What is Alias Ip address ranges? Whats the purpose?
		If a vm hosts many services then it can use alias ip addressess to expose those services.
		GKE uses these addresses heavily and for GKE its recommended practice.
	VMs in the VPC network can only send to IPv4 destinations and only receive traffic from IPv4 sources
	GCP supports only ipv4 addresses as of today.
	Fun fact : static ip addresses reserved but not in use are charged more than ones in use.

	Bring Your Own IP
		BYOIP
		If you your own ip address that you want to bring to gcp, you can use BYOI
	
	
Routes:
	Route is way of defining how packets move in between resources and eventually how resources communicate.
	Every default network has 
		a routes  that allow every resource in same network send packets to another resource.
		a default route that allow direct packets to destinations outside the network.
	But firewall must allow such packet movement.
	Manual networks dont have such route
	
	Default Routes
	Custom Routes
	static routes
	Dynamic Routes
	

Firewall Rules
	default fw rule is allow all egress but deny all ingress, present on all networks.
	Firewall rules allow you to control which packets are allowed to travel to which destinations. Every VPC network has two implied firewall rules that block all incoming connections and allow all outgoing connections.
	Firewall rules control traffic even if it is entirely within the network, including communication among VM instances.	

	 Firewall rules cannot block traffic that an instance sends to one of its own alias IP addresses, as trffic doesnt leave the resource. 
	
	Firewall :
		VPC firewall rules let you allow or deny connections to or from your virtual machine (VM) instances based on a configuration that you specify.
		Every VPC network functions as a distributed firewall which has Always blocked ingress and always allowed egress traffic
		Firewall rules only support IPv4 connections as of now
		Every VPC network wheather its auto or custom, has two implied firewall rules(not shown in the console).
				Implied allow egress rule
				Implied deny ingress rule
				The implied rules cannot be removed, but they have the lowest possible priorities. You can create rules that override them with high priorities
		Components of rule
				direction - ingress/egress 
										defult ingress if not mentioned
				target - instances on which rule applies
								 - all instances in network
								 - instances having specific network tags
								 - instances having specific service account
				source - instances on which rule applies
				protocol and port - 
							icmp- selects icmp protocol and all its allowed ports
							tcp:443,80 - selects tcp protocol and its ports 443 and 80 only
							udp:67-69 - selects udl protocol and ranges between 67 to 69
				priority : The rule with highest priority wins in case of conflict, 65535 being lowest
									 default priority is 1000
									 https://cloud.google.com/vpc/docs/firewalls#priority_order_for_firewall_rules
				enforecement status - enabled/disabled		
				action : allow/deny
	
	
	
Forwarding Rules
	USed in LB
	They have a ip address.
	
	

Alias Ip Ranges
		If you have multiple services running on a single VM instance, you can give each service a different internal IP address by using alias IP ranges. The VPC network forwards packets that are destined to a particular service to the corresponding VM.

		
Cloud DNS(ACE**)
		Important from ACE exam POV.
	Its a managed DNS name resolution service so that you dont have to run DNS servers yourself.
	Internal DNS
		DNS service that lets instances in the same network access each other by using internal DNS names
		e.g. You must have come across vm name such as "warmup.europe-west1-a.c.prod-project.internal". When we hit this name internla DNS will resolve the name to ip address.
	Cloud DNS
		GCP hosted DNS service.
		This DNS service provides DNS service for both public domains on internet as well as DNS services within VPC.
	Public DNS : 
		Google service that is NOT part of Google Cloud that acts as an open, recursive DNS resolver for THE INTERNET.



A company wants a maximum availability without having trouble of complex security. What is best choice?
		Dont create all your resources (compute engines) in same zone. There are likely chances that a zone might have a problem like resource limit exhausted, zone going down etc. As resources are within same network, complex security conifg is not required.
		Additionally placing resources in different regions even makes it more robust.
	

IP addresses
		internal : address used within VPC
		external : address used for communicating with internet
		ephemeral  : ephemeral IP address is released if you stop or delete the resource
		static		 : they live until you explicitly release it
		
		Alias ip ranges : This is useful if you have multiple services running on a VM and you want to assign each service a different IP address. Alias Ip ranges can be allocated from primary ip ranges or secondary ip ranges of subnet.
		Bring your own IP : IF yuo have services running on certain ip addresses and you dont want to touch the existing set up for some reason, you can bring your ip address to gcp and gcp will manage them in the same way as Google-provided IP addresses
		
		You can reserve a new static external IP address or promote an existing ephemeral external IP address to a static external IP address.
		Ephemeral external IP addresses are released from a resource if you delete the resource. For VM instances, the ephemeral external IP address is also released even if you stop the instance. After you restart the instance, it is assigned a new ephemeral external IP address.
		
		Note that the ephemeral internal ip addresses remain with VM even though they are stopped. They are released only after vm deletion. 
		----> Exact opposite of ephemeral internal ip addresses
		
		VVIMP : If you are communicating between instances in the same VPC network, they can communiate using FQDN as "Internal DNS" will automatically resolve FQDN to ip addresses.
		"warmup.europe-west1-a.c.prod-project.internal" -----Internal DNS-----> 10.2.0.10
		

VPC flow logs
		Yuo can enable the flow logs for each subnet.
		They are important for
				monitoring network throughput and performance
				network forensics
				Real time security analysis
				
				
Private Google Access
		If you want to access any public Google API service(pubsub API, gmail API, CAlender API, Firestore API, Cloud Function API)				
		AND
		you have only internal Ip address then you must enable Private Google Access.
		what is Google API service?
				https://developers.google.com/apis-explorer/#p/
				in a nutshell, all google apis can be called using a service endpoint url like 		
					https://cloudfunctions.googleapis.com.
					https://storage.googleapis.com/storage/v1
				If you want to call it like this way within the constraint of interal ip address, then it mandatory to enable this private google access.
		how? - go to subnet in vpc where you want to enable it and check the checkbox for Private Google Access.
				checkbox for enabling vpc flow logs is also there.
			
		For resources having external ip, they can access any google API service without Private Google Access.
		

Private Service Access
		Just like google as seen above, there can be other third party service providers who wants to expose their services to your applications as internal ip addresses within your vpc. In such a case, private service access is useful.
		This require you to reserve certain CIDR ip range block of your vpc for such service providers. This reserved block cannot be used for "your" vpc services.
		  	
	
A VM instance can connect to multiple VPC netoworks at the same time. By default it has default netowork interace but we can add more network interfaces.(subnet ranges must not overlap).
The number of interfaces allowed in an instance is dependent on the instance's machine type and the number of vCPUs. The n1-standard-4 allows up to 4 network interfaces.
https://cloud.google.com/vpc/docs/create-use-multiple-interfaces#max-interfaces
	

Identity-Aware Proxy: 
	?


Links :
	All in one playlist for networking : https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLIivdWyY5sqJ0oXcnZYqOnuNRsLF9H48u 
	Best Practices  https://cloud.google.com/architecture/best-practices-vpc-design
	
	
gcloud 
	Create a network
		gcloud compute networks create myvpc --subnet-mode=custom 
	Add Subnet to myvpc
		gcloud compute networks subnets create subnet-eu-1 --network=myvpc --region=europe-west-4 --range=172.10.0.10/24
	Add firewall Rule
		gcloud compute firewall-rules create fw-allow-ssh --direction=INGRES --priority=1000 --network=mycustomnw --action=ALLOW --rules=TCP:22,TCP:3389,ICMP --source-ranges=0.0.0.0/0
	Switch to custom mode nw
		gcloud compute networks update auto-network-1 --switch-to-custom-subnet-mode


Best Practices


Pricing



	