VVVVIMP Prerequiresites
	image is a serialized copy of the entire state of a system stored in some non-volatile form such as a file.
	Image as such is not of any use unless its coupled with a bootable disk on which its mounted.
	So you always mount an image on boot disk and then start your computer/vm
	see image1.jpg
	So standard process is, create an image from boot disk of your existing instace. Then this image can be used as source to create many boot disks. Then attach a boot disk to a vm and start vm with these new boot disk.
	
	
Image vs Snapshots
	A snapshot reflects the contents of a persistent disk in a concrete instant in time. An image is the same thing, but includes an operating system and boot loader and can be used to boot an instance.
	Images and snapshots can be public or private. In the case of images, public can mean official public images provided by Google or not.
	Snapshots are stored as diffs (a snapshot is stored relative to the previous one, incremental) while images are not. Snapshots are also cheaper ($0.03 per GB/month vs $0.085 for images).

	Image can consist of a boot disk and several other disks attached to VM. But snapshot is always associated to a single disk.	
	
	
When to use/create images?
	Image is ideal for situations where you have created and modified a persistent boot disk or specific image to a certain state and need to save that state for creating instances.
	While snapshots are used for disaster recovery purpose. They dont have os level data(?)
	
Images
	public images
	Custom images
	Premium Images
	Container Optimzed OS images
	
Image Families
	debian is an image family which may contain lof of other images created from base image debian.
	Image family is actually used to track latest version.
		here debian-10 is the latest version of debain family. And previous versions gradually become deprecated, obsolete and finaly deleted. As a developer you dont need to remember complex names of each version(debian-us-v3-20210101) but rfer to image family.
	

Custom Images Creation
	Creating a custom image is calling "Baking"	
	---> You can create a simple custom image by creating a new VM instance from a public image, configuring the instance with the applications and settings that you want, and then creating a custom image from that instance.
			e.g. create a new vm instance with debian-9 public image, add java, gradle, git, intellij, postman to it. Then create custom image and store it to cloud storage as "my-ultimate-dev-image"
			Congrats, you baked an image.
	---> You can create custom image from	
			disk
			another image
			snapshot
			tar of image stored in cloud storage
			virtual disk
			
	You can create an image from disk of running vm but to make it reliable, put vm in more predictable stage like stopped.
	If stopping vm not possible then at least try to make the disk state constant(by not writing anything on disk) while image is being created.	


Custom Images Deprecation
	ACTIVE : can be used
	Deprecated: In use but will trigger a warning
	Obsolete: Cannot be used, triggers error. Existing links to this image are still allowed.
	Deleted: error message is returned if you try to use a deleted image
	see @i	mage2.jpg
			
			
Security
	All disks in Compute Engine are encrypted by default using Google's encryption keys. Images built from disks are also encrypted
	